# Voice Activity Detection in Noisy Environments
Voice Activity Detection (VAD) using deep learning. Student project in collaboration between s153077 and s134868 for the course 02456 Deep Learning at DTU. Code is complementary to the handed-in report.

Abstract:

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems often require an always-on low-complexity Voice Activity Detection (VAD) module to identify voice before forwarding it for further processing in order to reduce power consumption. In most real-life scenarios recorded audio is noisy and deepneural networks have proven more robust to noise than the traditionally used statistical methods. This study investigates the performance of three distinct low-complexity architectures – namely Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) RNNs and an implementation of DenseNet. Furthermore, the impact of Focal Loss (FL) over the Cross-Entropy (CE) criterion during training is explored and findings are compared to recent VAD research. Using a 72-hour dataset built from open sources with varied noise levels, 12 Mel-frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) as well as their derivatives in a temporal context of 900 ms, a GRU-RNN with 30.000 parameters achieves an Area UnderCurve (AUC) of.991 and a False Acceptance Rate (FAR) of 3.61% given a False Rejection Rate (FRR) fixed at 1%. Focal Loss is found to improve performance slightly when using focusing parameter γ=2 and performance  improvements are observed for all three architectures when their number of parameters is increased, which suggests that network size and performance can be viewed as a trade-off. It is observed that in a high-noise environment, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) struggle  compared to pure RNNs where a 10.000 parameter LSTM-RNN achieves a FAR of 48.13% for fixed FRR at 1% compared to 58.14% for a DenseNet of comparable size.
